1
Navion: A 2mW Fully Integrated Real-Time
Visual-Inertial Odometry Accelerator for
Autonomous Navigation of Nano Drones
Amr Suleiman, Member, IEEE, Zhengdong Zhang, Student Member, IEEE, Luca Carlone, Member, IEEE
Sertac Karaman, Member, IEEE and Vivienne Sze, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents Navion, an energy-efficient be off-loaded to the cloud. As a result, a VIO system can
accelerator for visual-inertial odometry (VIO) that enables au- output the estimated motion at significantly higher throughput,
tonomous navigation of miniaturized robots (e.g., nano drones),
which is critical for autonomous navigation for fast moving
and virtual/augmented reality on portable devices. The chip
robots/drones/vehicles, and also critical to reduce the motion
uses inertial measurements and mono/stereo images to estimate
the drone’s trajectory and a 3D map of the environment. This sickness of a consumer using AR/VR devices.
estimateisobtainedbyrunningastate-of-the-artVIOalgorithm Many VIO algorithms have been proposed for implemen-
based on non-linear factor graph optimization, which requires tation [5–7]. However, running these algorithms in real–time
largeirregularlystructuredmemoriesandheterogeneouscompu- requires relatively powerful CPUs and/or GPUs [8]. Mounting
tationflow.Toreducetheenergyconsumptionandfootprint,the
powerful CPUs and GPUs on a big drone like Skydio R1 is
entire VIO system is fully integrated on chip to eliminate costly
feasible [9]. However, such solutions cannot be applied to off-chipprocessingandstorage.Thisworkusescompressionand
exploits both structured and unstructured sparsity to reduce nano and pico drones/unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) as
on-chip memory size by 4.1×. Parallelism is used under tight those presented in [10, 11]. This is because of the constraints
area constraints to increase throughput by 43%. The chip is on the form factor as well as the extremely limited power
fabricated in 65nm CMOS, and can process 752×480 stereo
budget available on these miniature vehicles. For example,
imagesfromEuRoCdatasetinreal-timeat20framespersecond
the budget for a stable flight in nano/pico drone is around
(fps) consuming only an average power of 2mW. At its peak
performance, Navion can process stereo images at up to 171 fps 100mW [11], which is an order of magnitude lower than the
and inertial measurements at up to 52 kHz, while consuming an power dissipation of embedded CPUs [12].
averageof24mW.Thechipisconfigurabletomaximizeaccuracy, This motivates us to build a VIO accelerator for miniature
throughput and energy-efficiency trade-offs and to adapt to
drones.PotentialutilizationofcustomacceleratorsforVIOwas
different environments. To the best of our knowledge, this is
mentioned in a review article on pico drones, which appeared
the first fully integrated VIO system in an ASIC.
recently in Nature [13]. There has been a lot of work on
IndexTerms—visualinertialodometry,VIO,localization,map-
buildingenergy–efficientacceleratorsfortheseapplications[14–
ping, SLAM, nano drones, navigation
16].Aunifiedgraphicsandvisionprocessorforposeestimation
is presented in [14]. However, the problem is simplified by
I. INTRODUCTION usingknownmarkersinimageswhichcanbeimpractical.Hong
et al. [15] implements a marker–less camera pose estimation
Autonomous navigation has attracted a lot of attention with
for a practical AR application, but it depends on off–chip
many consumer products available on the market. In this
image processing and external storage, which increase the
application, estimating the 3D motion within an environment,
overall system power consumption. Li et al. [16] implements
referredtoasego-motion,isofcrucialimportance.Itisthefirst
only parts of the image processing needed in a VIO/SLAM
step towards higher level tasks including motion planning and
system.Oneknowndownsideofcustomacceleratorscompared
obstacle avoidance [1–3]. Motion estimation is also important
to CPU/GPU–based implementations is the lack of flexibility,
inotherapplicationssuchasaugmentedreality(AR)andvirtual
which comes as a direct trade–off with the low power and fast
reality (VR) [4]. This problem is well–known in the robotics
processing that accelerators deliver. Some accelerators take it
community as simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM).
to an extreme by hard–wiring the design to perform a specific
Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) is a special instance of SLAM,
task in a specific environment [17], which severely limits its
wherevisual(camera)andinertialmeasurementunit(IMU)data
practical applications.
are used to estimate the location and map the surroundings.
In all of these works, the hardware design is separated
Fig. 1 illustrates the inputs and outputs of a VIO pipeline.
from the algorithmic choices; however, it is shown in [18]
Compared with a full SLAM system, VIO does not have loop
with an FPGA prototype implementation that a co-design
closure, which happens at much lower frequency and can
strategy can provide significant benefits. This work builds
A.Suleiman,Z.ZhangandV.SzearewiththeDepartmentofElectricaland on [18] and carries out more optimization for an efficient
ComputerScience,MIT.L.CarloneandS.KaramanarewiththeDepartment ASIC implementation. Here is a summary of the contributions
ofAeronauticsandAstronautics,MIT,CambridgeMA,02139.(Projectwebsite:
and findings of this work:
http://navion.mit.edu/).ThisworkwaspartiallyfundedbytheAFOSRYIP
FA9550-16-1-0228andbytheNSFCAREER1350685. • We propose Navion, an energy-efficient and fully inte-
8102
peS
51
]OR.sc[
1v08750.9081:viXra
2
frontend (VFE), IMU frontend (IFE), and Backend (BE)
followingthestandardterminologyin[19].TheVFE tracks3D
landmarks (L) in the scene by extracting their corresponding
i
2Dfeatures(i.e.,corners)fromacameraframe,andtracksthem
between consecutive frames to create feature tracks. The IFE
summarizes the IMU sensor data between two camera KFs
into one measurement. The BE fuses the summarized inputs
from the two sensors through a non-linear graph optimization,
and then it outputs the position and orientation of the drone.
A. Vision Frontend (VFE)
Fig.1. Visual-InertialOdometry(VIO)processingimageandIMUmeasure- TheVFE detects and tracks 2D features that correspond to
mentsstreamsfortrajectoryand3Dmapoutput. the 3D landmarks in the scene across frames from the camera.
It supports both mono and stereo modes. VFE implements
five main functions on the input images: feature tracking
grated VIO implementation on-chip that runs in real– (FT), feature detection (FD), undistort & rectify (UR), stereo
time to enable autonomous navigation in miniaturized matching (SM), and geometric verification (GV).
robots/UAVs. Compared to an optimized software VIO
• FeatureTracking(FT)usesthePyramidalLucas-Kanade
implementation, Navion is 1582× more energy-efficient
optical flow [21] to track features corresponding to the
than Xeon desktop CPU, and 684× more energy-efficient
same landmark across all frames, including non KFs.
thanalowpowerembeddedARMCPU.Tothebestofour
• FeatureDetection(FD)extractsfeaturesintheleftstereo
knowledge, this is the first fully integrated VIO system
frame using the lightweight Shi-Tomasi corners [22].
in an ASIC.
Features are detected on a grid to keep the number of
• Multiple algorithmic and architectural optimizations are
features in different regions of a KF constant.
carriedoutinNavion.Efficientmemoryhierarchyanddata
• Undistort & Rectify (UR) processes the left and right
movement enable a 9× reduction of the external DRAM
stereo frames only at KFs to prepare them for disparity
bandwidth. Data compression reduces on-chip memory
calculations.
sizeby4.4×,whiletakingadvantageoffixedanddynamic
• Stereo Matching (SM) is only active in stereo mode
datasparsityenables5.2×and5.4×smallermemorysize,
and it only runs on KFs. It gets the 3D coordinate of a
respectively. Rescheduling and parallelism enable 43%
feature using template matching between left and right
faster processing with minimal to no overhead.
stereo frames [23]. Since stereo frames are undistorted
• We find that adding sufficient adaptability in Navion’s
and rectified, template matching happens on a horizontal
architecturecanimproveaccuracyandincreasethroughput
search line.
basedontheenvironmentandcameramovement.Adapting
• Geometric Verification (GV) removes any incorrect
Navion to the different sequences results in an additional
matches (i.e., outliers) resulting from FT and/or SM, and
2.5× improvement in energy efficiency.
itrunsonlyatKFs.Randomsampleconsensus(RANSAC)
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
is used in this pipeline. In Navion, RANSAC is informed
givesanoverviewoftheVIOalgorithm.InSectionIII,Navion
bytherotationestimateproducedbygyroscopeintegration.
architecture is presented showing the degree of flexibility in
This enables using the simpler 2-point method [24] for
the architecture. Section IV discusses some of the hardware
FT (i.e.,monoRANSAC)and1-pointmethod[25]forSM
optimizations for memory size reduction. Section V shows the
(i.e., stereo RANSAC), instead of the more complicated
evaluation of Navion’s accuracy and an analysis of the effect
5-point RANSAC method.
of changing the chip’s configuration parameters on overall
In summary,VFE processes the input mono/stereo frames
performance. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
to track several landmarks (L in Fig. 2) based on their
i
2D projections in the images (i.e., features f in Fig. 2).
i
II. OVERVIEWOFVISUAL-INERTIALODOMETRY(VIO)
VFE outputs landmark IDs, and their corresponding feature
The Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) can be used to estimate coordinates in left and right frames; this information will be
the trajectory of a sensing device (e.g., sensors mounted on a usedtogeneratefeaturetracksintheBE.InNavion,VFE uses
drone)whilereconstructingamapoftheenvironmentasshown feature tracking rather than feature descriptors to find features
in Fig. 2. The trajectory is the collection of the drone’s state x, correspondencebetween frames.Thisavoidsthecomputational
specifically its position P and orientation R, over time. These overhead of the costly feature matching process.
statesareestimatedbasedonmeasurementsoftheenvironment.
Navionimplementsthekeyframe-basedVIOpipelinedescribed
B. IMU Frontend (IFE)
in [7]. The keyframes (KFs) are a subset of the incoming
frames at which the state estimation is performed. IMU is The IFE summarizes all the IMU measurements between
used for a continuous motion/state estimation in between two consecutive KFs into a single preintegrated measurement.
KFs. The pipeline consists of three main components: Vision The mathematical details are outside the scope of this paper
3
Fig.2. VIOpipelinebasedon[20].IFE summarizestheIMUmeasurementsbetweenKFs,whileVFE tracksfeaturesininputimagesthatcorrespondto
importantlandmarksinthescene.VFE isKF based,i.e.,ittracksfeaturesinallframes,butremovesoutliers,addsnewfeaturestocompensatelostones,and
performsstereomatchingonlyatKFs.BE fusesVFE andIFE outputstoperformstateestimationatKFsusingfactorgraphoptimization.
and can be found in [20]. The preintegration between KFs that describes the constraints between the 3D position and
i and j gives the relative rotation (∆RRR˜ ), velocity (∆vvv˜ ) and orientationofalltheKFsthatobservethesamelandmark;IMU
ij ij
position (∆ppp˜ ). At each KF, IFE outputs the preintegration factors describes the difference between the relative motion
ij
measurements to BE. between a pair of KFs given by the IMU measurements and
the estimated relative motion from the state variables, and
marginalization factor the describes the constraints between
C. Graph Optimization Backend (BE)
the states of the KFs that were connected by any factor
TheBE fusesthefeaturetracksfromtheVFE outputandthe that fall outside the current horizon. The BE must perform
IMU data from the IFE by solving a non-linear optimization an optimization to find the KF states that best satisfies the
problem whose solution is the KF state estimation, which
constraintssetbythesefactorsandminimizeanydiscrepancies.
describes the drone’s trajectory and a sparse 3D landmarks
BE solves the minimization problem using an on manifold
map.Theoptimizationisperformedonmultiplestateswithina
Gauss-Newton method [20]. The four main functions are
sliding time window, referred to as the horizon, using a fixed-
linearization, linear solver, marginalization, and retract as
lag smoother to compute the maximum a posterior (MAP)
shown on the right side of Fig. 2. Specifically, the factors
estimate [20]. It formulates the problem as a factor graph [26],
are linearized and accumulated into a large system of linear
which describes the relationship and thus constraints1 between
equations (H∆x=ε), where the Hessian matrix H and the error
all states in the horizon; these relationships between states
vector ε describe how the frontend measurements affect each
defined by the factors are non-linear. There are three main
KF state in the horizon, and the solution vector ∆x is the state
types of factors in BE: vision factors are the feature tracks
update.
A linear solver uses Cholesky factorization and back-
1Here,wedon’tusetheformaldefinitionofconstraintsforoptimization.
Instead,thesefactorsareincludedintheobjectivefunctionintheoptimization. substitution to solve this linear system of equations [27].
4
Marginalization summarizes the information of the states that c) VIO vs VO: Including inertial measurements increases
fall outside of the current time window. All the factors that the robustness of a SLAM system, especially in the indoor
constrainthesestatesareremovedfromthegraph.Asaresultof environments where insufficient visual features can be detected
marginalization and limited horizon, the structure of the factor and tracked (e.g., a drone facing a white wall). It can also
graph is dynamically updated over time. Finally, the solution provide a good initialization for the non–linear optimization
of the linear system (∆x) is used to update the remaining KF in the backend, reducing the number of iterations needed for
statesinthehorizonusingretractsuchthattheupdatedvariable BE to converge to a good state estimation.
is also on the manifold. Generally, the Gauss-Newton method d) Stereo vs Mono: Using stereo frames avoids the scale
isiterativebutourBErunsonlyoneiterationbecausetheIMU ambiguity of a mono VIO system [23]. However, a stereo
information is used to provide a good initialization. camera has higher power consumption than a mono camera.
Navion’s BE supports a very large and continuously varying Therefore,Navionsupportsbothmonoandstereomodesforthe
factor graph problem, with a maximum of 20 KFs in the user to choose depending on the target application scenario.
horizon and 4000 vision factors (i.e., landmarks); the selection
of these parameters are described next in Section II-D. This III. NAVION:ARCHITECTURE
poses challenges in storing and maintaining the graph on–chip
Fig. 3 shows the overall architecture of the proposed VIO
efficiently.
hardware accelerator. The VIO pipeline is fully integrated in
Navion with no external storage or computation required. The
D. Design Considerations architecture consists of the frontend (i.e.,VFE, IFE), which
a) Parameters: InNavion,afewimportantparameterscan processes the high–dimensional sensor data, and the backend
havesignificantimpactonthetrade–offinmemory,throughput (i.e., BE) which performs the state estimation following the
and accuracy of the design. algorithm discussed in Section II. Navion is a standalone
• Horizon size determines how many KFs are used in the accelerator that takes images (mono or stereo) and inertial
BE. Let N be the number of KFs in a horizon. The size measurements as inputs, and outputs the trajectory and the
of the linear system that BE solves after linearization is sparse 3D map of the surrounding environment.
O(N2).Thetimecomplexityforsolvingthislinearsystem With the optimizations carried out in this work, no external
is O(N3). Therefore, reducing N can significantly reduce storage is required (e.g., DRAM), which lowers the overall
thememoryandincreasethethroughputofthesystem,but system power consumption. Navion has more than 250 pro-
it will hurt the accuracy of the estimated trajectory [18]. grammable parameters (a subset of them is shown later in
Navion has a horizon size of 20. Table II). Some of these parameters are used to define the
• Number of features tracked per frame affects all the camera and IMU calibration and settings, such that a wide
major components ofVFE linearly in terms of the power range of sensors can be used with Navion. The remaining
and the throughput. Navion tracks up to 200 features per parameters are used to control the VIO pipeline’s complexity
frame. and trade–off accuracy, throughput and power consumption
• Feature track age is the maximal length allowed for a across different environments as shown later in Section V-D.
feature track. This parameter affects how many feature
tracks will be included in the factor graph based optimiza- A. IMU Frontend (IFE)
tion. Since each feature corresponds to a vision factor,
Inertial measurements, with 6 values per measurement (i.e.,
scaling the feature track age affects the BE linearly. Note
3 values from the accelerometer and 3 values the gyroscope)
that a larger feature track age is generally preferred for
are streamed into the chip through a 32–bit input bus in single
high accuracy. Navion has a feature track age of 10.
precision. IFE (lower left box in Fig. 3) processes them using
In applications where the tolerance of localization error is
double precision arithmetic to perform the IMU preintegration
higher, it is possible to tune these parameters to reduce the
basedon[20].Itcontainsasmallsharedregisterfileanda2kB
memoryandincreasethethroughputofthedesignsignificantly.
SRAM to store intermediate data and the preintegrated results.
b) Optimization Method: We employ a non–linear factor-
IFE uses a dedicated double precision arithmetic compute unit
graph based optimizer rather than an extended Kalman Filter
that runs in parallel with the rest of the chip. The number
(EKF) in our BE. EKF essentially summarizes all the feature
of operations in the preintegration process is relatively small,
tracks between two adjacent KFs into one factor, hence the
henceIFE’scomplexityislowcomparedtotherestofthechip.
maximal feature age can be considered to be 2. Therefore,
It accounts for only 2.4% of the chip area, while consuming
EKF has lower complexity but its average motion (i.e., state)
around 1% of the average total power.
estimation error can be 3× higher when benchmarked on the
EuRoC dataset [28].
B. Vision Frontend (VFE)
Bundle adjustment is also a very well known technique to
estimate the camera positions from the visual features [23]. The input images, with a maximum resolution of 752×480
The goal is to minimize the total reprojection error from the pixels, are streamed into the chip through two 8–bit buses for
landmark to the features. It is identical to a special case of left and right stereo images, which are processed by theVFE
the factor graph optimizer presented in this work, where only (upper left box in Fig. 3). The input pixels are stored on–chip
vision factors and prior factors are used. in line and/or frame buffers to lower the external bandwidth
5
Fig.3. OverallarchitectureofNavionchip.AllcomponentsoftheVIOpipelineareintegratedon–chip.Framebuffers,FactorGraph,andLinearSolver
memoriesaccountfor95%oftheon–chipmemory.Memoryoptimizations,alongwithreschedulingandparallelism,arecarriedouttoenablefullintegration.
by up to 9× to 0.34 MB/frame only, which is the minimum horizon size of 20 KFs in the optimization problem. Horizon
bandwidth required to stream in a single frame (i.e., no pixel StatesmemorystoresthestateoftheKFsinthehorizon,while
is read more than once). VFE uses fixed point arithmetic the Shared Memory stores large intermediate data. BE outputs
for lower power and smaller area, and can be divided into the trajectory and the sparse 3D map of the surroundings at
two different dataflows: parallel image processing and serial the KF rate.
geometric validation. Navion uses double precision arithmetic in the BE and IFE
The image processing dataflow (i.e., FT, FD,UR, and SM) to ensure robustness of the VIO system. This doubles the size
processes pixels in parallel to increase the throughput. The of all memories in BE and IFE. Using single precision does
geometricvalidation,highlightedbythedashedboxinsideVFE not provide sufficient numerical precision for the underlying
in Fig. 3, implements mono and stereo RANSAC using finite VIO algorithm from [20]. This is due to the fact that the VIO
state machines (FSM), shared memory and shared arithmetic pipeline is an open–loop system. Therefore, as time goes on,
compute unit.VFE accounts for 53% of the overall chip area, the uncertainty of the state estimation keeps increasing and the
andcontains439.4kBSRAMwhichisdominatedbyfourframe conditionnumberofthelinearsystemincreases;thiscausesthe
buffers: original frames from the camera are stored in Frame problem to be ill–defined and thus cannot be properly solved.
(1) and Frame (2) memories to support FT. Undistorted and
rectified frames are stored in Left Frame and Right Frame
D. Processing Modes
memories to support SM.VFE detects a total of 1824 features
Navion has two modes of operations since the VIO is KF–
per frame, and can track up to 200 features per frame.
based, as shown earlier in Fig. 2. A detailed timing diagram
is shown later in Fig. 12. IFE is active in both modes.
C. Backend
KF processing (stereo images labeled red in Fig. 2): In this
BE (right box in Fig. 3) solves the factor graph optimization mode, stereo frames are streamed in and all components are
problem. Due to the serial nature of this process, a dataflow active. FT, FD, UR and SM modules process the incoming
similar to the geometric validation in VFE is used with a frames in parallel. The control FSM then starts the mono and
complex FSM. To reduce area and increase resource sharing, stereo RANSAC in series to perform the geometric verification
BE’s FSM is divided into a hierarchy of smaller FSMs. and remove outliers before adding new features as needed. BE
The small FMSs include: 1) Matrix operations that are used then starts solving the factor graph optimization problem. The
all over the factor graph optimization problem. 2) Cholesky trajectoryandsparsemapoutputsareupdatedafterBE isdone.
factorization and back–substitution used in both linear solver Non–KF processing (all other stereo images in Fig. 2): In
and marginalization processes. 3) Rodrigues operations that this mode, FT is the only active component, while the rest of
are used in the linearization and retract processes. VFE and BE are off and clock–gated to reduce their power
A shared register file is used, with 85 double precision consumption. Right frames are not streamed in to reduce the
registers, as a memory hierarchy for intermediate data storage off–chip memory bandwidth. The previously tracked features
similar to IFE, along with 412.6kB of SRAM. The Factor are stored in the Tracking Data memory, and FT updates them
GraphmemorystorestheVFE andIFE outputsinthehorizon, in–place if successfully tracked, or removes them from the
whicharethenlinearizedintotheLinearSolverMatrixmemory. memory if tracking fails. On average, processing non–FK is
BE includes more than 4000 factors to support a maximum 3.8× faster than processing KF.
6
Fig.4. Memorysavingsvs.VIOerrorwithlossyimagecompression.
Fig.5. Block–wiseimagecompressionarchitecture.
IV. ARCHITECTUREOPTIMIZATIONS
threshold (5-bit) and minimum value (5-bit). With a compute
This section presents the main optimizations carried out to
overhead of 4 kgates (0.8% of the total kgates) and a 1.4kB
enable energy–efficient full VIO integration in Navion. Table I,
line buffer, compression reduces the frame memory size by
shown in next section, summarizes the resulting size reduction
4.4× and power by 4.9×. Compressed frames are used in SM
of the various on–chip memories, which is important to reduce
andFT,buttheyarenotuseinFDbecauseitismoresensitive
power consumption and area cost. Additionally, we exploit
blocking and quantization artifacts as shown in Fig. 5.
parallelism and rescheduling to increase the overall throughput.
A. Image Compression B. Feature Tracks Unstructured Sparsity
VFE hasfourframebuffersasshowninSectionIII-B.These Feature tracks account for 88% of the factor graph memory
buffers are needed because of the random reading patterns inBE.Theycontainallobservedfeaturesinthecurrenthorizon,
in FT, as a feature can move to anywhere between frames and are used by BE to solve the non–linear optimization
depending on the camera movement. Additionally, multiple problem. Each feature track stores the KF IDs where the
frame readings happens over time in SM since it runs twice landmark is observed in, and the 3D coordinates of the
at different time slots. As a result, frames are stored on–chip corresponding feature in each KF. Fig. 6–a shows an example
to avoid re–streaming. Lossy image compression is used to of some feature tracks. Although a maximum feature age is
reduce the size of these frame buffers. defined(e.g.,10inNavion),featuretrackshavevariablelength
Fig.4showsthetrade–offbetweenthecompressionratioand depending on the image sequence. A feature track can be short
the VIO error. For a minimal overhead cost, two compression because its landmark gets out of the field of view while the
methodsareanalyzed.Truncatingtheleastsignificantbits(LSB) camera is moving (e.g., L
2
), or because the tracking algorithm
the simplest method to reduce the bitwidth with no overhead. fails to track a landmark over time (e.g., L 5 ).
Fig. 4 shows that VIO error increases by just 6% going from Fig. 6–b shows the feature tracks stored in one memory.
8–bit to 5–bit per pixel while achieving 38% memory size Designing for the worst case, the memory has to store all
reduction. However, the error increases much faster after that observations in 20 KFs (i.e., maximum number of KFs in a
to more than double at the extreme of 1–bit per pixel. horizon) each having 200 features (i.e., maximum number of
Another lossy compression technique is block–wise quanti- features tracked per frame) and 10 observations per landmark
zation. The frame is divided into blocks of N×N pixels, and (i.e.,maximumfeatureage).Thisresultsinabig962kBSRAM,
the dynamic range of each block is quantized into 2 levels with 40,000 entries, each containing a 5–bit KF ID and 3
for a 1–bit per pixel representation. This technique’s overhead 64–bit double precision numbers for the 3D coordinates per
includes a line buffer storing N−1 rows and some logic to observation. This memory is populated with measurements
calculate the dynamic range of each block. The shaded part in fromVFE, and it is continuously changing with old features
Fig. 4 shows the numbers for three different block sizes: 4×4, being removed and new features being added.
8×8, and 16×16. The 4×4 block quantization achieved less Toreducethesizeofthislargememory,wenoticedthatitis
error than the 3–bit case, while increasing the memory savings sparselypopulatedwithamaximumof4,000observationsfrom
from 2.7× to 4.4×. VFE (200 features tracked per frame, 20 KFs in a horizon).
Fig. 5 shows the image compression architecture used in However,thedistributionofthesenon–zeroentriesisunknown
Navion, which combines both lossy compression techniques and depends on the feature track length (Fig. 6–a). As a result,
described above. The pixels are quantized to 5–bit by simple a two–stage memory architecture is used as shown in Fig. 6–c.
LSB truncation, then the image is divided into blocks of 4×4 The first sparse memory still has 40,000 entries, but rather
pixels. The pixel intensity dynamic range within each block is than storing the 3D double precision coordinates, it stores
found, anda threshold divides this rangein half. Every pixelis 12–bit pointers to the second dense memory, which stores the
then represented by 1–bit, which is the result of comparing the 3D values of the 4,000 observations. This reduces the graph
pixel intensity to the threshold. Accordingly, each 4×4 block memory size by 5.4×, with an overhead of increasing access
of pixels uses 26 bits to store its dynamic range (1-bit/pixel), latency by only one cycle.
7
Fig.6. Memorysizereductioninthevisionfactorsmemory.(a)Examplesof
featuretrackswithvariablelength.(b)Storingfeaturetracksinonememory
designedforworstcase.(c)Dividingthememoryintotwostageswithpointers.
Fig.7. Fixedsparsityvisualizationinlinearsolvermatrix,withmemorysize
C. Linear Solver Structured Sparsity reductionandthroughputincrease.
The first step in BE to solve the non–linear factor graph
optimization problem is to linearize all factors in the horizon.
The result is a linear system of equations (H∆x=ε), where
H is the Hessian matrix and ε is the residual error resulting
from the linearization process. With a maximum of 20 KFs
in the horizon, matrix H size is 300×300 as shown in Fig. 7,
where each KF’s state contains 15 variables: 3 for position,
3 for orientation, 3 for velocity, and 6 for IMU bias. The H
matrix is stored in the linear solver memory in BE, where it
is updated every KF.
The H matrix, shown in Fig. 7, has some characteristics that
enable memory size reduction. For instance, H is symmetric,
which directly results in 2× memory size reduction by only
Fig.8. BEprocessingtimesavingsbyexploitingsparsityinthelinearsolver
storingtheupper(orlower)triangle.Additionally,basedonthe
matrix. The horizon size (in number of KFs) defines the size of the linear
ratio between the feature track age and the horizon size, only system.Percentagesshowhowmuchtimeisspentinthelinearsolverrelative
38% of each of the matrix’s triangles have non–zero values, toBEprocessingtime.
labeled in black in Fig. 7, and their positions are fixed. By
storing only the non–zero values, a total 5.2× memory size
reduction is achieved. Fig. 7 shows the linear solver memory number of KFs in the horizon increases. At 20 KFs in the
wrapper. A sparse–based control unit takes the read/write horizon, a maximum of 2.5× speed–up of BE processing time
requests with the row and column addresses, and it controls is achieved.
whethertoperformtheread/writeoperationonthesmall134kB
memory or to mask it according to the fixed sparsity pattern.
D. Rescheduling and Parallelism
Fig. 7 also shows the linear solver process, happening in–
place in the linear solver memory. Cholesky factorization Parallelism is carefully used to increase the throughput with
and back–substitution are used to solve H∆x=ε. These two minimaloverhead.VFE inparticularissuitableforparallelism
operationsinvolvetraversingthematrixrowbyrowandcolumn due its nature of running image processing computation. The
by column. Taking into account the fixed sparsity pattern of H, main advantage of rescheduling is that it achieves processing
the linear solver processing time can be reduced by skipping time savings without any effect on the overall system accuracy.
processing the zero locations. With the maximum horizon size Fig. 9–a shows the rescheduling ofVFE’s pipeline to make
of 20 KFs, a 7.2× speed–up is achieved by exploiting the use of parallel processing in hardware. Algorithmically, the
H matrix structured sparsity. Fig. 8 shows the BE’s overall imageprocessingpartsoftheVFE canruninparallel.Although
processing time savings with different horizon sizes. The the algorithm has some dependency where FD waits for FT
linear solver processing time increases with O(N3) without and RANSAC to know how many new features are needed to
sparsity,comparedtoanincreasemuchslowerthanO(N)when be detected (Fig. 9–a top), this dependency can be broken by
exploiting sparsity. This results in more time savings as the pre–detecting features and selecting the relevant features later
8
Fig.9. (a)ReschedulingVFE’spipelineprocessingKFs.(b)ReschedulingBE’spipeline.
Memory Size(kB)
Savings
Blocks Before After
FrameBuffers 1410 317.6 4.4×
LineBuffers 78.2 –
VFE TrackingData 18.2 –
FeaturesCandidates 16 –
KeyframeData 11.7 –
IFE IntegratedData 2 –
FactorGraph 1012 205.6 4.9×
LinearSolverData 882.4 163.5 5.4×
BE
HorizonStates 5.2 –
SharedMemory 36 –
Total 3471.7 854 4.1×
TABLEI
THESIZEOFDIFFERENTMEMORYBLOCKSINNAVION,SHOWINGNUMBERS
BEFOREANDAFTEROPTIMIZATIONSINSECTIONIV.
(Fig. 9–a bottom). This parallelism is not exploited in software
because firing up multiple cores can significantly increase
power consumption, which is already high with one core. The
rescheduling results inVFE’s processing time saving between
43% to 55% depending on the environment. This comes with Fig.10. Diephotoandsummaryofthechipspecifications.
a 77kB (10%) memory overhead with line buffers to support
the required bandwidth of the parallel components. Parameter MaximumValue
AnotherreschedulingiscarriedoutinBE’spipelinetoenable Frameresolution 752×480
parallelismbetweenBE andVFE.AtKFs,BE waitsforVFE Numberoffeaturesperframe 200
andIFE toprocesstheiroutputs.However,IFE ismuchfaster Feature
Pyramid(PFT) 3levels
Tracking
Cellsize(CFT) 15×15pixels
and its output is ready earlier thanVFE as shown in Fig. 9–b. Iterations(IFT) 30perlevel
BE processing can be rescheduled such that the initialization
Stereo
Templatesize(TS) 51×5pixels
and all IMU factors linearization start immediately after IFE’s
Searchregion(RS) 421×5pixels
Horizonsize 20Keyframes
output is available. This results in BE’s processing time saving Backend Featureage 10Keyframes
between 4% to 19% depending on the scene, with no overhead. Featuretracks 4000tracks
TABLEII
MAINPROGRAMMABLEPARAMETERSWITHTHEIRMAXIMUMVALUES.
V. IMPLEMENTATIONANDRESULTS
A. Chip Implementation Results
Fig. 10 shows the die photo of Navion chip with a summary different sequences in EuRoC dataset [29] used for evaluation;
of the chip specifications and the memory optimization results. this is referred to as the tracking rate. The chip can also
Navion is implemented in a 65nm CMOS technology with 2 process inertial measurements at up to 52kHz. Navion updates
million NAND2 equivalent logic gate count and 854kB on– the states and the sparse 3D map at KF rate of 16–90 fps,
chip SRAM. The chip contains two clock domains, one for which is the BE rate, also depending on the sequence. It
VFE and the other for both IFE and BE. By using image consumes an average power consumption of 24mW when
compressionandexploitingstructuredandunstructuredsparsity, operating at 1V. These numbers are measured when Navion’s
an overall 4.1× memory saving is achieved, which enables programmable parameters are set to their maximum values;
fullVIO pipeline integration on–chip. Table I shows different the main parameters are shown in Table II. Changing these
memory sizes before and after optimizations. parameters values can trade–off accuracy, throughput and
Navioncanprocessstereoimageswithamaximumresolution power consumption across different environments, as shown
of 752×480 at a rate of 28–171 fps in real–time across the in Section V-D.
9
Fig.12. Navion’stimingbreakdownatmaximumconfiguration(62.5MHz
VFE clock and 83.3 MHz BE clock). Numbers are averages over EuRoC
dataset.
Fig.11. Areaandpowerbreakdown.
B. Demonstration System
To validate the fabricated chip, a demonstration system is
developed for real–time localization and mapping as shown in
Fig. 13. It is composed of the custom test chip board and a
Fig. 11 shows Navion’s area and power breakdowns. IFE Xilinx ZC-706 evaluation board. The FPGA board is used to
has a very low cost from both area and power points of view, stream images and IMU measurements to the chip, and read
whileVFE and BE have relatively similar area. The average the output results for verification and visualization. The Xilinx
power consumption of BE is 40% of the total power since it Zynq–7000 FPGA has 2 ARM Cortex–A9 embedded cores.
is active only at KFs. It’s worth–mentioning that the large on– A C API is developed on an Ubuntu operating system in the
chipSRAMpowerisonly21%ofthetotalpowerconsumption, ARM core to control the dataflow through several buses using
althoughitaccountsfor77%ofthechiparea.Thisisaresultof AXI protocol. Fig. 13 shows Navion’s output trajectory drawn
dividing the large memories (i.e., frame buffers, vision factors on the monitor in real–time. A video of this demo system can
memory, etc.) into small banks, and clock–gating the ones that be found on the Navion project website [30].
are not used. This results in 5–9× power savings, depending
on the memory size.
C. Evaluation Results
Fig. 11 also shows a detailed power breakdown of VFE To evaluate Navion’s accuracy, we use the EuRoC
and BE, where different dataflows result in different power dataset [29] which is one of the most challenging and widely
distribution. InVFE, parallel image processing modules (i.e., used datasets for UAVs flying indoors. EuRoC dataset contains
FT, FD, UR, and SM) consume the majority of the power 11differentsequences,eachrepresentingtheUAVflyinginone
comparedtocontrolandFSM.FT consumesthelargestamount of three different rooms: Machine Hall (MH), Vicon room 1
of power inVFE because it is always active regardless of the (V1), and Vicon room 2 (V2). Some of the sequences are quite
frame type (i.e., KF or not). However, in BE, half of the challengingastheyhaverelativelyfastandunstablemotionand
power is consumed by the control and FSM because of the strong brightness change, which lead to dark and/or blurred
serial nature of the BE’s architecture. Additionally, almost one images. The sequences are divided into easy, medium and
quarter of BE’s power is consumed by the shared arithmetic difficult sequences accordingly.
unit. Table III shows the average error, throughput and power
numbersoftheVIOcomparingNaviontosoftwareimplementa-
Fig. 12 shows a detailed timing breakdown for the dif- tions on a desktop Intel Xeon E5-2667 CPU and an embedded
ferent VIO modules, in both non–KF and KF, measured ARM Cortex-A15 CPU. The trajectory error is defined as
on average over different sequences in EuRoC dataset (see the difference between the VIO output and the ground truth
SectionV-C).Basedonthereschedulingoptimizationdiscussed along the whole flight path (Fig. 14). To account for different
in Section IV-D, FD,UR, and SM modules all run in parallel sequence lengths, the trajectory error is normalized to the
with FT at KFs, where their processing time is hidden. For flight length. In this experiment, all sequences are processed
BE, the majority of the processing time (65%) is consumed with the same configuration parameters in both the software
in linearizing the vision factors. Linearizing IMU and the implementation and Navion. Due to randomness in RANSAC,
other factors (not shown in Fig. 12) is carried out in parallel all accuracy numbers (i.e., trajectory error) are the average of
with VFE processing, and it takes less than 2 ms to finish. 5 runs per sequence.
Additionally, the linear solver is relatively fast (i.e., only 25% Navion’s average trajectory error increases by 6.27 cm, over
of BE’s processing time) as it exploits sparsity by skipping an average flight length of 83 m in EuRoC dataset. Hence, the
processing of zeros. normalized error increases from 0.22% to 0.28%. This 0.06
10
Fig.13. Demonstrationsystem.ARMcoreinZynq–7000SoCisconnectedtotheon–boardDRAMthoughtAXI0bus.AXI1andAXI2busesareusedto
connecttheARMcoretothecontrolandtheinterfacelogicontheFPGAfabric.ThetwoclocksignalsneededtorunthechiparegeneratedontheFPGA.
Fig. 15. VIO average error for the 11 sequences in EuRoC dataset. VIO
Fig.14. VIOoutputexamplewithgroundtruth,processingasequencefrom
parametersaresettotheirmaximumvaluesforallsequences.
EuRoCdataset.
Platform Xeon ARM Navion
highly textured regions in the easy sequences (i.e., MH 1,
Trajectoryerror(cm) 16.98 23.25
Trajectoryerror(%) 0.22% 0.28% MH 2, V1 1 and V2 1), low trajectory error are achieved in
Averagetrackingthroughput(fps) 63 19 71 both CPU and Navion. However, the error increases for the
Frontend 19 3 45
AverageKF blurry, dark, and fast moving medium and difficult sequences.
Backend 35 6 32
throughput(fps) Total 12 2 19 Note that for this experiment, the VIO parameters are set
Averagepower(W) 27.9 2.4 0.024 to their maximum settings, in both Navion and the software
Energy(mJ/KF) 3638.6 1573.2 2.3
implementations, for all 11 sequences.
TABLEIII
VIOAVERAGEERROR,THROUGHPUTANDPOWERPROCESSINGEUROC
DATASET.
D. Adapting to the environment
The flexibility that Navion presents with its programmable
parameters gives an opportunity to trade–off throughput,
percentage point error increase is mainly due to lossy image accuracy and power consumption. This is done by configuring
compression and fixed point arithmetic inVFE. Based on the the chip differently based on the environment and/or the UAV
odometry survey in [31], different algorithms have relative movement. Accuracy numbers for each sequence, previously
trajectory errors ranging from 0.1 to 2%. Thus, Navion has a shown in Fig. 15, show a large gap between the trajectory
relativelylowaveragetrajectoryerrorcomparedtotheseworks. error of easy and difficult sequences when all have the same
Additionally, Navion achieves three orders of magnitude less configuration. Particularly, difficult sequences MH 4, MH 5
energy consumption compared to both Xeon and ARM cores. and V2 3 have relatively large trajectory error when using the
Fig. 15 shows the VIO trajectory error detailed for the 11 same configuration as other sequences. Additionally, adapting
sequences in EuRoC dataset, in both Xeon/ARM CPU and to the environment also means that Navion’s workload can
in Navion. As expected, with slow motion, bright scene, and change based on the environment, resulting in energy savings.
11
Parameters
Name Error
Features/frame Horizonsize
MH 1 35 10 0.33%
MH 2 35 10 0.22%
MH 3 35 10 0.22%
MH 4 150 10 0.29%
MH 5 100 15 0.30%
V1 1 35 10 0.21%
V1 2 35 10 0.19%
V1 3 35 10 0.33%
V2 1 50 10 0.33%
V2 2 35 10 0.16%
V2 3 50 15 0.34%
TABLEIV
VIOINDEPENDENTPARAMETERSPERSEQUENCEFOR0.35%TARGET
TRAJECTORYERROR.
To show the potential savings that can be achieved with
adaptation,wesetatargetnormalizedtrajectoryerrorof0.35%
for all sequences, and find the optimum configuration for each
one independently to meet this target. Table IV shows the
main adapted parameters for each sequence and the resulting
normalizedtrajectoryerror.Smallnumberoffeaturesandsmall
horizon size are sufficient in easy sequences because it is easy
to track them. This reduces the workload of easy sequences,
which reduces the energy consumption. More features and
longer horizons are used in difficult sequences to account for
the short feature tracks.
Fig.16showsacomparisonbetweenNavion’smeasurements
with and without adaptation. Fig. 16–a shows the trajectory
error for each sequence. Although the average trajectory error
remains the same for both cases, the individual error numbers
for the easy sequences (i.e., MH 1, MH 2, V1 1 and V2 1)
increased slightly but are still within the 0.35% target, and Fig.16. Withandwithoutadaptationcomparisonsforthe11sequencesin
EuRoCdataset.(a)Trajectoryerror.(b)Energyconsumption.
the error for difficult sequences (i.e., MH 4, MH 5 and
V2 3) decreased significantly. Fig. 16–b shows the energy
WithoutAdaptation WithAdaptation
consumption for each sequence. The energy numbers for all
Max Fixed Fixed Max Fixed Fixed
sequences decreased significantly by an average of 2.5×. Configuration Rate Dist Rate Rate Dist. Rate
Table V shows the average throughput and energy numbers Traj.Error 0.28% 0.27%
when adapting Navion for each EuRoC dataset sequence. VFEClock(MHz) 62.5 45.7 16.8 62.5 18.6 6.6
BEClock(MHz) 83.3 60.9 22.5 83.3 24.8 8.8
Different throughput modes are shown such that: 1) Maximum
Tracking(fps) 71 41 20 142 41 20
rate means that Navion is running at its maximum frequency KF(fps) 19 14 5 49 14 5
for all sequences. 2) Fixed distance means that the throughput Power(mW) 24 18 6 22 7 2
TABLEV
of each sequence is set for a constant distance between KFs
NAVION’SERROR,THROUGHPUT,CLOCKFREQUENCIESANDPOWER
(5 cm/KF). 3) Fixed rate means that Navion is running at the NUMBERSFORDIFFERENTCONFIGURATIONS,WITHANDWITHOUT
rate of which EuRoC dataset is captured (i.e, 20 fps). In this ADAPTATION.NUMBERSAREAVERAGESOVEREUROCDATASET.
third configuration, and with adaptation, Navion can process
the EuRoC dataset while consuming only an average power
of 2mW. This experiment is clearly showing the importance
ASIC solution, Navion. A simple yet effective on–chip image
of having a configurable VIO accelerator that can adapt to
compression technique is developed to reduce the size of the
the environment, not only for an improved accuracy, but also
memory. A specialized memory architecture is proposed to
for large energy and power savings. In all these experiments,
efficientlystorethemono/stereofeaturetrackswithinthewhole
the power supply was set to 1V. Additional power and energy
horizon. Both structured and unstructured sparsity patterns of
savings can be achieved by lowering down the supply voltage.
the memory for the BE are exploited to further reduce the
memory and increase the throughput.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Navion is fabricated in a 65nm CMOS technology. Several
Scaling down localization and mapping to nano and pico important parameters can have significant impact on the trade–
drones/robots requires hardware and algorithm co–design. In off in throughput, accuracy and energy efficiency of Navion.
this paper, we improve our initial co–designed visual–inertial These parameters include, for example, keyframe rate, horizon
odometry on FPGA and propose the first fully integrated size, and number of feature tracks. They are designed to be
12
programmable, allowing the chip to prioritize different goals [18] Z. Zhang, A. Suleiman, L. Carlone, V. Sze, and S. Karaman.
under different scenarios. At its peak performance, Navion can Visual-inertial odometry on chip: An algorithm-and-hardware
process 752×480 stereo image at up to 171 fps and inertial co-design approach. In RSS, 2017.
[19] C. Cadena, L. Carlone, H. Carrillo, Y. Latif, D. Scaramuzza,
measurements at up to 52 kHz while consuming an average of
J. Neira, I. Reid, and J. J. Leonard. Past, present, and future
24mW at 1V. When configured to process EuRoC dataset at of simultaneous localization and mapping: Toward the robust-
the sensor rate of 20 fps, the chip consumes only an average perception age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 32(6):1309–
of 2mW at 1V. Thus, Navion can adapt to handle different 1332, 2016.
[20] C. Forster, L. Carlone, F. Dellaert, and D. Scaramuzza. IMU
environments while being energy efficient and processing in
preintegrationonmanifoldforefficientvisual-inertialmaximum-
real–time, which makes it suitable for different applications
a-posteriori estimation. In RSS, 2015.
suchasautonomousnavigation,mapping,andportableAR/VR. [21] Bruce D. Lucas and Takeo Kanade. An iterative image
registration technique with an application to stereo vision. In
REFERENCES The International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 2, pages 674–679, 1981.
[1] Francesco Nex and Fabio Remondino. UAV for 3D mapping
[22] Jianbo Shi and C. Tomasi. Good features to track. In IEEE
applications: a review. Applied Geomatics, 6(1):1–15, 2014.
CVPR, pages 593–600, 1994.
[2] F Mohammed, A Idries, N Mohamed, K Al-Jaroodi, and
[23] R. I. Hartley and A. Zisserman. Multiple View Geometry
I Jawhar. UAVs for smart cities: Opportunities and challenges.
in Computer Vision. Cambridge University Press, ISBN:
In International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems
0521540518, second edition, 2004.
(ICUAS), 2014.
[24] L. Kneip, M. Chli, and R. Siegwart. Robust real-time visual
[3] Kimon P Valavanis and George J Vachtsevanos. UAV Applica-
odometry with a single camera and an imu. In BMVC, pages
tions: Introduction. In Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,
1–11, 2011.
pages 2639–2641. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2015.
[25] J. Civera, O. G. Grasa, A. J. Davison, and J. M. M. Montiel.
[4] D. Chatzopoulos, C. Bermejo, Z. Huang, and P. Hui. Mobile
1-pointransacforekf-basedstructurefrommotion. InIEEE/RSJ
augmented reality survey: From where we are to where we go.
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
IEEE Access, 5:6917–6950, 2017.
pages 3498–3504, 2009.
[5] A.I. Mourikis and S.I. Roumeliotis. A multi-state constraint
[26] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger. Factor
Kalmanfilterforvision-aidedinertialnavigation. InICRA,pages
graphs and the sum-product algorithm. IEEE Transactions on
3565–3572, April 2007.
Information Theory, 47(2):498–519, 2001.
[6] G. Sibley, L. Matthies, and G. Sukhatme. Sliding window filter
[27] M. Kaess, A. Ranganathan, and F. Dellaert. isam: Incremental
withapplicationtoplanetarylanding. JFR,27(5):587–608,2010.
smoothing and mapping. IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
[7] C. Forster, Z. Zhang, M. Gassner, M. Werlberger, and D. Scara-
24(6):1365–1378, 2008.
muzza. Svo: Semidirect visual odometry for monocular and
[28] Jeffrey Delmerico and Davide Scaramuzza. A benchmark
multicamerasystems.IEEETransactionsonRobotics,33(2):249–
comparison of monocular visual-inertial odometry algorithms
265, 2017.
for flying robots. Memory, 10:20, 2018.
[8] Kimon P Valavanis. Classification of UAVs. In Kimon P
[29] MichaelBurri,JanoschNikolic,PascalGohl,ThomasSchneider,
Valavanis and George J Vachtsevanos, editors, Handbook of
Joern Rehder, Sammy Omari, Markus W Achtelik, and Roland
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,
Siegwart. The euroc micro aerial vehicle datasets. The
2015.
International Journal of Robotics Research, 2016.
[9] Skydio. https://www.skydio.com/2018/02/introducing-r1/.
[30] Navion website. http://navion.mit.edu/.
[10] R J Wood, B Finio, M Karpelson, K Ma, N O Pe´rez-Arancibia,
[31] F. Fraundorfer and D. Scaramuzza. Visual odometry: Part ii
P S Sreetharan, H Tanaka, and J P Whitney. Progress on ‘pico’
matching, robustness, optimization, and applications. IEEE
air vehicles. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
Robot. Autom. Mag., 19(2):78–90, 2012.
31(11):1292–1302, 2012.
[11] J Bonnet, P Yin, M E Ortiz, P Subsoontorn, and D Endy.
Controlled Flight of a Biologically Inpsired, Insect-Scale Robot.
Science, 340(6132):599–603, 2013.
[12] https://www.qualcomm.com/products/snapdragon/processors/
410e.
[13] DarioFloreanoandRobertJWood. Science,technologyandthe
futureofsmallautonomousdrones. Nature,521(7553):460–466,
2015.
[14] J. S. Yoon, J. H. Kim, H. E. Kim, W. Y. Lee, S. H. Kim, AmrSuleiman(S’08–M’18)receivedtheB.S.and
K. Chung, J. S. Park, and L. S. Kim. A unified graphics and M.S.degreesinElectronicsandElectricalCommuni-
vision processor with a 0.89 /spl mu/w/fps pose estimation cationsEngineeringfromCairoUniversity,Egyptin
engine for augmented reality. IEEE Transactions on Very Large 2008and2011respectively.HereceivedtheM.S.and
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 21(2):206–216, 2013. Ph.D.degreesinElectricalEngineeringandcomputer
science from MIT in 2013 and 2018 respectively.
[15] I. Hong, G. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Kim, B. G. Nam, and H. J. Yoo.
He is currently working as a research scientist in
A 27 mw reconfigurable marker-less logarithmic camera pose
FacebookRealityLabs.Amr’sresearchworkfocuses
estimationengineformobileaugmentedrealityprocessor. IEEE
ondevelopingnewenergy–efficientimplementations
JSSC, 50(11):2513–2523, 2015. formachinevisionalgorithms(e.g.detection,recogni-
[16] Z. Li, Q. Dong, M. Saligane, B. Kempke, L. Gong, Z. Zhang, tion,andtracking).AmrisarecipientoftheEndowed
R. Dreslinski, D. Sylvester, D. Blaauw, and H. S. Kim. A 1920 fellowshipoftheArabRepublicofEgypt,andthe2015BroadcomFoundation
times 1080 30-frames/s 2.3 tops/w stereo-depth processor for UniversityResearchCompetition.
energy-efficient autonomous navigation of micro aerial vehicles.
IEEE JSSC, 53(1):76–90, 2018.
[17] S.Murray,W.Floyd-Jones,Y.Qi,G.Konidaris,andD.J.Sorin.
The microarchitecture of a real-time robot motion planning
accelerator. In IEEE/ACM MICRO, pages 1–12, 2016.
13
Zhengdong Zhang (S’15) received the B.S. in
ComputerSciencein2011fromTsinghuaUniversity,
Beijing, China. He received the M.S. degree in
ComputerSciencefromMassachusettsInstituteof
LucaCarloneistheCharlesStarkDraperAssistant
Technology,Cambridgein2014.Between2011and
Professor in the Department of Aeronautics and
2012heworkedinMicrosoftResearchAsia,Beijing,
AstronauticsattheMassachusettsInstituteofTechnol-
China,asanAssistantResearcher.Heispursuingthe
ogy,andaPrincipalInvestigatorintheLaboratoryfor
Ph.D.degreeunderthesupervisionofProf.Vivienne
Information&DecisionSystems(LIDS).Hereceived
Sze.Hisresearchinterestspanstheareaofsparsity,
his PhD from the Polytechnic University of Turin
low-rank matrix recovery, symmetry/regularity of
in2012.HejoinedLIDSasapostdoctoralassociate
textures, 3D computer vision, computational pho-
(2015) and later as a Research Scientist (2016),
tographyandvisionsystems.Hiscurrentresearchfocusesonthedesignof
after spending two years as a postdoctoral fellow
energy-efficientvisionsystems.
attheGeorgiaInstituteofTechnology(2013-2015).
Vivienne Sze (S’04–M’10–SM’16) received the
Hisresearchinterestsincludenonlinearestimation,
B.A.Sc.(Hons)degreeinelectricalengineeringfrom
numericalanddistributedoptimization,andprobabilisticinference,appliedto
theUniversityofToronto,Toronto,ON,Canada,in
sensing,perception,anddecision-makinginsingleandmulti-robotsystems.His
2004, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degree in electrical
workincludesseminalresultsoncertifiably-correctalgorithmsforlocalization
engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of
andmapping,aswellasapproachesforvisual-inertialnavigationanddistributed
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, in 2006 and
mapping.Heistherecipientofthe2017TransactionsonRoboticsKing-Sun
2010respectively.In2011,shereceivedtheJin-Au
FuMemorialBestPaperAward,andthebestpaperawardatWAFR2016.
KongOutstandingDoctoralThesisPrizeinElectrical
EngineeringatMIT.
SheisanAssociateProfessoratMITintheElectri-
calEngineeringandComputerScienceDepartment.
Herresearchinterestsincludeenergy-awaresignalprocessingalgorithms,and
Sertac Karaman is an Associate Professor of
low-power circuit and system design for portable multimedia applications
AeronauticsandAstronauticsattheMassachusetts
including computer vision, deep learning, autonomous navigation, image
Institute of Technology (since Fall 2012). He has
processing and video coding. Prior to joining MIT, she was a Member
obtainedB.S.degreesinmechanicalengineeringand
of Technical Staff in the Systems and Applications R&D Center at Texas
incomputerengineeringfromtheIstanbulTechnical
Instruments (TI), Dallas, TX, where she designed low-power algorithms
University, Turkey, in 2007; an S.M. degree in
andarchitecturesforvideocoding.ShealsorepresentedTIintheJCT-VC
mechanical engineering from MIT in 2009; and a
committeeofITU-TandISO/IECstandardsbodyduringthedevelopmentof
Ph.D.degreeinelectricalengineeringandcomputer
HighEfficiencyVideoCoding(HEVC),whichreceivedaPrimetimeEmmy
sciencealsofromMITin2012.Hisresearchinterests
EngineeringAward.Withinthecommittee,shewastheprimarycoordinatorof
lieinthebroadareasofroboticsandcontroltheory.
thecoreexperimentoncoefficientscanningandcoding,andhaschaired/vice-
Inparticular,hestudiestheapplicationsofprobability
chairedseveraladhocgroupsonentropycoding.Sheisaco-editorofHigh
theory,stochasticprocesses,stochasticgeometry,formalmethods,andoptimiza-
EfficiencyVideoCoding(HEVC):AlgorithmsandArchitectures(Springer,
tionforthedesignandanalysisofhigh-performancecyber-physicalsystems.
2014).
Theapplicationareasofhisresearchincludedriverlesscars,unmannedaerial
Prof.Szeisarecipientofthe2018&2017QualcommFacultyAward,the
vehicles,distributedaerialsurveillancesystems,airtrafficcontrol,certification
2018 Facebook Faculty Award, the 2016 Google Faculty Research Award,
andverificationofcontrolsystemssoftware,andmanyothers.Hedelivered
the 2016 AFOSR Young Investigator Research Program Award, the 2016
thetheRobotics:ScienceandSystemsEarlyCareerSpotlightTalkin2017.
3M Non-Tenured Faculty Award, the 2014 DARPA Young Faculty Award,
HeistherecipientofanIEEERoboticsandAutomationSocietyEarlyCareer
the2007DAC/ISSCCStudentDesignContestAwardandaco-recipientof
Award in 2017, an Office of Naval Research Young Investigator Award in
the2017CICCOutstandingInvitedPaperAward,the2016IEEEMicroTop
2017, Army Research Office Young Investigator Award in 2015, National
PicksAwardandthe2008A-SSCCOutstandingDesignAward.Prof.Szeisa
ScienceFoundationFacultyCareerDevelopment(CAREER)Awardin2014,
DistinguishedLectureroftheIEEESolid-StateCircuitsSociety(SSCS),and
AIAAWrightBrothersGraduateAwardin2012,andanNVIDIAFellowship
currentlyservesonSSCSAdComandthetechnicalprogramcommitteesfor
in2011.HeservesasaboardmemberfortheRobotics:ScienceandSystems
VLSISymposium,SysMLandMICRO.
(RSS) Foundation, as the technical area chair for the robotics area for the
IEEETransactionsonAerospaceElectronicSystems,andaco-chairofthe
IEEERoboticsandAutomationSocietyTechnicalCommitteeofAlgorithms
forthePlanningandControlofRobotMotion.